---
class:      capitolo
lang:       en
layout:     manuale
og_img:     "/assets/img/og-img/preprocessore.jpg"
permalink:  /en/preprocessor
quote:      "All powers grow, except that of 1"
status:     pubblicato
title:      "The Preprocessor"
translation_reference: preprocessore
og_desc:    "Entropic values and gravitational values - Pornography according to Justice Potter Stewart - Love is a backdoor - Heaven isn't interested in your happiness - The duty to give thanks."
---

Preprocessor directives are C++'s main distinguishing feature.

In the previous examples we saw some peculiar instructions, because they have a `#` character at the start and no `;` character at the end:

```
#include <iostream>

#define NO_ERRORI    0
#define NO_PARAMETRI 1
```

These instructions are *preprocessor directives*, and they come in three kinds:

- inclusion directives;
- definitions and macros;
- conditional directives.

*Inclusion directives* are the most commonly used, and they're used to import into the code the definitions of library functions, macros, and symbols needed for programs to compile correctly.
For convenience, these elements are kept isolated inside certain files, called *include files*.
When the preprocessor encounters an `include` directive, it replaces it with the contents of the file it refers to.
For example, if more than one program needed to use the `Colore` class or the `ColoreRGB` struct we used in the program that displays the size of the <a href="/en/data-types#principali">main C++ data types</a>, these would need to be isolated in a separate file with a `.h` extension, to indicate that it's a *header file*:

```
{% include_relative src/preprocessore-colore.h %}
```

The file would then be included in the code of the programs that use it with an `include` directive:

```
{% include_relative src/preprocessore-main.cpp %}
```

This example uses two distinct forms of the `include` directive:

```
#include <iostream>
#include "colore.h"
```

The first form is used to include system files, like `iostream` itself, which contains the definitions of C++'s standard *streams*; the second form is used for application-specific files, in our case, `colore.h`.
Include files can themselves include other files; for example, `colore.h` includes `iostream`, because it uses the `cout` *stream*.
Our example code, however, also includes `iostream`, and this could cause a compile error if the precompiler performed the inclusion twice, since it would be as if we declared the same function twice.
For this reason, at the top of our include file (and of `iostream` too) we find another type of preprocessor directive, the <i>conditional directives</i>:

```
#ifndef _CLASS_COLORE
#define _CLASS_COLORE 1

...

#endif /* _CLASS_COLORE */
```

The conditional directives are:

| directive | meaning |
|---|---|
| `#if`     | if non-zero
| `#ifdef`  | if defined
| `#ifndef` | if not defined
| `#else`   | otherwise
| `#elif`   | otherwise if
| `#endif`  | end of the conditional block

When the preprocessor reads the first directive in the include file, it checks whether a value is defined for `_CLASS_COLORE`.
If `_CLASS_COLORE` has no associated value, the preprocessor runs the next instruction, which assigns it the value 1, then inserts into the calling file all the code up to the `#endif` instruction.
If instead `_CLASS_COLORE` already has an associated value because it was already included by another file, the preprocessor jumps straight to the `#endif` directive without rewriting the three declarations.

The following instructions define numeric constants for the colors of the `RGB` `enum`:

```
#define  RGB_RED    0xFF0000
#define  RGB_GREEN  0x00FF00
#define  RGB_BLUE   0x0000FF
```

Preprocessor directives also let you define string constants:

```
#define  STR_GREEN  "verde"
```

This is a good thing, because, as you'll learn from experience, having *hardcoded* strings inside your programs always causes problems, and above all ties your code to a specific language:

```
colore.coloreRgb.nome = "verde";     

/** Mostra il valore delle variabili */
cout << "booleano:"    << booleano   << endl;
cout << "carattere:"   << carattere  << endl;
cout << "intero:"      << intero     << endl;
cout << "decimale:"    << decimale   << endl;
cout << "array:"       << array      << endl;
```

This may be acceptable in a sample program, but it's a shortsighted choice for a real program, especially if the strings recur in different contexts:

```
char stringa[] = "ebete";

...

cout << 6 << "ebete" << endl;

```

because if the string ever needs to change (and rest assured, it will), you'll have to modify every line of code where it appears.
By contrast, if you define constants for every string you use in your code, the fix only needs to happen in one place:

```
#define STR_COME_SEI "astuto"

char stringa[] = STR_COME_SEI;

...

cout << 6 << STR_COME_SEI << endl;

```

Combined with conditional directives, string constant definitions let you have multi-language code:

```
#ifdef LANG_IT
    #define  STR_RGB    "colore RGB"
    #define  STR_RED    "rosso"
    #define  STR_GREEN  "verde"
    #define  STR_BLUE   "blu"
#else
    #define  STR_RGB    "RGB color"
    #define  STR_RED    "red"
    #define  STR_GREEN  "green"
    #define  STR_BLUE   "blue"
#endif
```

The definition of the constant that determines the condition (in this case, `LANG_IT`) can happen either in the code of the program that includes the file with the definitions:

```
#define LANG_IT
#include "colore.h"
```

or directly from the command line, as a compilation parameter:

```
% g++ ./cpp/preprocessore-main.cpp -D LANG_IT -o ./out/esempio
% ./out/esempio                                               
  booleano: 0
 carattere: C
    intero: 1234567890
  decimale: 3.14
     array: abcdefghilmnopqrstuvz
colore RGB: verde
% g++ ./cpp/preprocessore-main.cpp -D LANG_EN -o ./out/esempio
% ./out/esempio                                               
   boolean: 0
 character: C
   integer: 1234567890
   decimal: 3.14
     array: abcdefghilmnopqrstuvz
RGB color: green
```

You can remove a previously assigned `#define` by means of the `#undef` directive:

```
#define LANG_IT
#include "preprocessore-colore.h"
#undef LANG_IT

#ifdef LANG_IT
    #define  STR_BOOL   "booleano"
    #define  STR_CHAR   "carattere"
    #define  STR_INT    "intero"
    #define  STR_DEC    "decimale"
    #define  STR_ARRAY  "array"
    #define  STR_VERDE  "verde"
#else
    #define  STR_BOOL   "boolean"
    #define  STR_CHAR   "character"
    #define  STR_INT    "integer"
    #define  STR_DEC    "decimal"
    #define  STR_ARRAY  "array"
    #define  STR_VERDE  "green"
#endif
```

The output of this code will be:

```
% g++ src/cpp/preprocessore-main.cpp -D LANG_EN -o src/out/esempio
% ./src/out/esempio                                               
   boolean: 0
 character: C
   integer: 1234567890
   decimal: 3.14
     array: abcdefghilmnopqrstuvz
colore RGB: verde
```
<hr id="macro-istruzioni">

The preprocessor can also be used to create *macros* that can be used with different data types.

```
#define MAGGIORE(a,b) ((a > b) ? a : b)
```

When the precompiler finds a call to the MAGGIORE macro inside the code, it replaces it with the corresponding instruction, swapping the parameters `a` and `b` for the variables used in the call.

```
{% include_relative src/preprocessore-macro.cpp %}
```

If you compile and run this code, you get:

```
> g++ src/cpp/preprocessore-macro.cpp -o src/out/esempio
> src/out/esempio                                         
209
0.7
z
```

Precompiler macros run before the code is compiled, so they can also be used to create functions out of thin air.

```
{% include_relative src/preprocessore-hashtag.cpp %}
```
<!-- adattamento di: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/preprocessor/replace -->

This example makes use of two operators specific to the preprocessor:

- the *stringification* operator `#` (I refuse to translate this term), which converts the following parameter into a string, adding double quotes around it and adding *backslashes* before any double quotes already present in the parameter;
- the *concatenation* operator `##`, which merges the preceding and following parameter into a single string.
If you compile and run this code, you get:

```
> g++ src/cpp/preprocessore-hashtag.cpp -o src/out/esempio
> src/out/esempio                                         
12
PippoPluto
```

Precompiler macros are a very powerful tool, but they must be used with care, because, being generated **before** compilation even starts, they aren't subject to any consistency check on the type of the parameters used.
This, as we'll see <a href="/en/polymorphism#funzioni-template" class="xref">later on</a>, can produce very subtle and hard-to-find bugs.

<hr id="dottrina">

The three forces that govern the life of the Universe &mdash; Gravity, Entropy, and the Age-Old Dichotomy &mdash; don't just affect physics, they affect ethics too.
There are values we might call "entropic" and "gravitational" values.
Values tied to Entropy are the ones that tend to separate and to exalt the individual over the mass, like freedom, wealth, success, or fame; values tied to Gravity are the ones that, by contrast, unite individuals, like the French *égalité* and *fraternité* — but without the guillotine.
<a href="/en/operators#effimeri" class="xref">Yesterday</a> we saw how values tied to Entropy are ephemeral &mdash; it couldn't be otherwise, for a force that tends toward disintegration &mdash;, and how whoever pursues them often falls victim to the Age-Old Dichotomy, but that doesn't mean we should reject them.
Don't make the mistake of thinking there's a good force and a bad one, like in *Star Wars*: both Gravity and Entropy are necessary for the Universe to evolve properly.
Master Canaro, who loved cycling well into old age, once told me that the balance of the Universe is like the balance of a cyclist riding an uphill dirt road: he mustn't lean his weight too far forward, because then the rear wheel would lose traction and start to slip, but he mustn't lean too far back either, because then the front wheel would lift and steering would become impossible.
Given the respectable number of falls and bruises Master Canaro collected over the course of his rides, I'd recommend taking only the metaphorical value of this teaching, namely that there has to be a balance between Gravity and Entropy, because without Gravity the Universe is pointless, but without Entropy it's boring.
Right now, the Universe is in an expansion phase under the influence of Entropy, so it's normal for there to be a preponderance of actions tending toward separation.
To maintain balance, then, we need to encourage the activities and values that tend to bring things together, like love or art.
Many people think love and art are vague, fickle concepts, but only because they misunderstand their essence, treating them as self-explanatory concepts that need no definition; something similar to the definition of "*pornography*" given by Justice Potter Stewart, regarding Louis Malle's film *Les Amants*:

> I shall not today attempt further to define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced within that shorthand description; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. But I know it when I see it, and the motion picture involved in this case is not that.<a class="nota" href="/en/notes#fn-steward" id="steward">1</a>

This entropic/subjective approach, however correct in the case of *Les Amants*, is clearly wrong in general terms: all words, even the most common ones, can be interpreted differently by whoever hears or uses them.
Just as the word <i id="pesce">fish</i>, however plain, may not mean the same thing to a marine biologist, an environmentalist, or a fisherman, so too the word *art* can take on different meanings for a gallery owner, an artist, or a Pope.
The entropic/romantic interpretation commonly attributed to the words *love* and *art* is just as wrong.
Love is not the vague feeling that has made the fortune of poets, musicians, and writers, but a (more or less lasting) state of our organism in which we consider someone or something more important than ourselves.
Art (please, capitalize this term in your book), on the other hand, is not the exaltation of a single personality, but is &mdash; and must be &mdash; the trace of our journey in search of the Meaning of Life: God, for those who believe in Him, or Perfection, for non-believers.
We'll go deeper into this last concept <a id="arte" href="/en/ereditarieta#arte" class="xref">later on</a>; here and now, as Céline Dion would say, *let's talk about love*.

<hr id="amore">

We all act according to frameworks of values that determine our choices.
The survival instinct usually pushes us to place ourselves at the top of this pyramid, but sometimes we may end up choosing, as our supreme good, someone or something other than ourselves.
That godless Dawkins
<!-- Utilizzo questo appellativo in maniera affettuosamente canzonatoria: Dawkins ha cambiato il mio modo di vedere il Mondo o, almeno, parte di esso. Credo solo che faccia un errore di generalizzazione, ritenendo tutti i fedeli dei fanatici e dei bigotti. -->
showed how the attachment we feel toward our relatives is directly proportional to the number of chromosomes we share with them, and can therefore be traced back to the primordial desire to perpetuate our genetic heritage.<a class="nota" href="/en/notes#fn-selfish" id="selfish">2</a>
This ribonucleic interpretation of love works very well for blood relationships (parent/child, grandparent/grandchild, uncle or aunt/nephew or niece, etc.), but it doesn't explain the love between a mother and a father, or between grandmother and grandfather &mdash; at least, in families that don't consider incest an acceptable practice.
The *selfish gene* doesn't explain other forms of love either, like love of country, which drives young people to sacrifice their lives in war,
<!--
La maggior parte dei soldati parte controvoglia perché costretta, ma la storia - e sfortunatamente anche i cimiteri -, sono pieni di esempii di giovani che si sono arruolati volontariamente. Boccioni ed Hemingway, per esempio, ma anche diversi ciclisti.
-->
love for one's fellow man, which leads a missionary to sacrifice their life to help the sick, or love for a form of art, a sport, or a job.
The truth is that love is a *backdoor*, or, better: a time bomb, secretly planted in your software, to push you to do the right thing when your moment comes.
Love is the only force that is at once gravitational and entropic.
Gravitational, because it unites individuals; entropic, because it drives them to reproduce, replicating their DNA into something *else*.
It pushes you to stay home, in front of a canvas, a music score, or a blank page, or it makes you go out, on a saddle, a track, or with a camera in hand.
It takes you to a mountaintop or a slum; to the Pole or the desert; it throws you into the sea, but doesn't come to save you, unlike in the song; it makes you leave a secure job because you no longer recognize the person you see in the mirror in the morning, or it makes you stay in a monastery, even though.
And that's the easy part; then there's love between individuals.
Have you ever fallen in love?
No? Well, it'll happen.
There are two ways to fall in love: either you meet someone and fall in love with them, or you meet someone and discover it's them (or him, or her) that you've always loved.
The first is the more common case; the second case is no coincidence.
Master Canaro once said (though I don't believe it was originally his):

> Women spend their whole lives looking for their ideal man; in the meantime, they get married.

This holds true for everyone, men and women alike.
Your DNA contains the genes that gave rise to the love between your parents: green eyes, broad shoulders, a nice chest, or maybe a nice backside.<a class="nota" href="/en/notes#fn-orologiaio" id="orologiaio">3</a>
In the same way, there could be something inside you that will drive you to seek out and love one particular person, because that person matters to your life.
When (if) you meet them, you'll feel as though you've known them forever, and you'll understand that every time you've ever fallen in love, you were falling in love with them, even though you didn't know them yet.
Unfortunately, this doesn't mean your story will last, or that you'll live happily ever after, like in fairy tales. Quite the opposite, in fact.
Heaven isn't interested in your happiness, but in your improvement, which, like any form of growth, comes at a price.
Everyone knows Master Canaro solved the *Mu Koan* in one night of deep grief, after the death of a dog named Lele.
Many, for this reason, consider the dog Lele a *Bodhisattva* who gave his life to spark in the Master the first flicker of Enlightenment.
They're right, but only partly, because the death of the dog Lele was only one of the causes of that night's bitterness.
Master Canaro told me that a good part of the pain had been caused by a woman he loved, and by whom he had been hurt.
The reason he told me this is the same reason I'm telling you now: years later, when the Master had already laid the foundations of C'hi++, he went back to that woman and thanked her for the wrong she had done him, because it had put him in the state of mind he needed to understand something he might otherwise never have grasped.
<br id="ringraziare">
Thanking those who do us good through kind actions is basic manners; thanking those who do us good through pain isn't easy, but it's necessary, so that the same action will be repeated in our future existences as well.
